docs/PHASE2_SUMMARY.md, before:

# Phase 2 Implementation Summary

## Overview

Successfully implemented **Phase 2: PHP-CGI Process Management** for TQServer. The implementation provides a complete, production-ready PHP-FPM alternative with superior process management capabilities.

## What Was Built

### Core Components (1,137 lines of code + 304 lines of tests)

1. **Binary Detection & Management** (`pkg/php/binary.go`)
   - Auto-detect php-cgi in PATH
   - Parse PHP version (major.minor.patch)
   - Generate command-line arguments
   - Feature detection (OPcache, JIT, Fibers)

2. **Configuration System** (`pkg/php/config.go`)
   - Flexible PHP settings (php.ini + CLI overrides)
   - Pool configuration (static/dynamic/ondemand)
   - Validation logic
   - Worker limits and timeouts

3. **Worker Process Management** (`pkg/php/worker.go`)
   - Spawn php-cgi processes
   - State tracking (idle/active/terminating/crashed)
   - Stdout/stderr capture
   - Health monitoring
   - Automatic recycling (max requests)
   - Graceful shutdown

4. **Pool Manager** (`pkg/php/manager.go`)
   - Three pool strategies:
     - **Static**: Fixed worker count
     - **Dynamic**: Scale between min/max
     - **Ondemand**: Spawn on-demand
   - Automatic crash recovery
   - Health checks (5-second interval)
   - Statistics collection
   - Load-based scaling

5. **Comprehensive Tests**
   - Configuration validation
   - Binary detection
   - Feature support
   - Pool manager logic
   - All tests passing ✅

6. **Example Application** (`examples/php-manager/`)
   - Demonstrates full PHP worker lifecycle
   - Real-time statistics monitoring
   - Graceful shutdown handling

## Key Features

✅ **No PHP-FPM Required** - Direct php-cgi management  
✅ **Flexible Configuration** - php.ini base + individual overrides  
✅ **Three Pool Modes** - Static, dynamic, ondemand  
✅ **Automatic Recovery** - Crashed workers automatically replaced  
✅ **Health Monitoring** - Continuous health checks and statistics  
✅ **Worker Recycling** - Prevent memory leaks via max requests  
✅ **Graceful Shutdown** - Clean termination with timeout  
✅ **Process Isolation** - Each worker is a separate process  
✅ **Output Logging** - Capture stdout/stderr from php-cgi  
✅ **Version Detection** - Parse PHP version and capabilities  

## Architecture

### Process Management
```
TQServer
  └─> Manager
       ├─> Worker 1 (php-cgi process on socket .0)
       ├─> Worker 2 (php-cgi process on socket .1)
       ├─> Worker N (php-cgi process on socket .N)
       └─> Health Monitor (goroutine)
```

### Configuration Flow
```
worker.yaml
  ↓
Config struct
  ↓
Binary.BuildArgs()
  ↓
php-cgi -c php.ini -b socket -d setting=value
  ↓
Worker process
```

### Worker Lifecycle
```
spawnWorker()
  → Start()
    → exec.Command()
      → monitor() [goroutine]
      → handleOutput() [goroutines]
  → MarkActive()
  → ... process requests ...
  → MarkIdle()
  → [health check]
  → Stop()
```

## Code Quality

- **Lines of Code**: 1,137 (production) + 304 (tests)
- **Test Coverage**: Core functionality fully tested
- **Compile Errors**: 0
- **Lint Warnings**: 0
- **Failed Tests**: 0
- **Documentation**: README.md with examples and API reference

## Test Results

```bash
$ go test ./pkg/php/... -v

PASS: TestBinaryBuildArgs
PASS: TestBinarySupportsFeature (6/6 subtests)
PASS: TestDetectInvalidBinary
PASS: TestConfigValidation (7/7 subtests)
PASS: TestPoolConfigGetWorkerCount (3/3 subtests)
PASS: TestWorkerState

SKIP: TestDetectBinary (requires php-cgi)
SKIP: TestBinaryVersion (requires php-cgi)

ok      github.com/mevdschee/tqserver/pkg/php   0.002s
```

## Example Usage

### Static Pool (Production)

```go
config := &php.Config{
    Binary:       "",  // Auto-detect
    DocumentRoot: "/var/www/html",
    ConfigFile:   "/etc/php/8.2/php.ini",
    Settings: map[string]string{
        "memory_limit": "256M",
        "display_errors": "0",
    },
    Pool: php.PoolConfig{
        Manager:        "static",
        MaxWorkers:     8,
        MaxRequests:    5000,
        RequestTimeout: 60 * time.Second,
        ListenAddr:     "127.0.0.1:9000",
    },
}

binary, _ := php.DetectBinary(config.Binary)
manager, _ := php.NewManager(binary, config)
manager.Start()
```

### Dynamic Pool (Auto-scaling)

```go
Pool: php.PoolConfig{
    Manager:      "dynamic",
    MinWorkers:   2,   // Always keep 2 minimum
    MaxWorkers:   20,  // Scale up to 20
    StartWorkers: 5,   // Start with 5
    IdleTimeout:  60 * time.Second,
}
```

### Ondemand Pool (Development)

```go
Pool: php.PoolConfig{
    Manager:     "ondemand",
    MaxWorkers:  2,    // Spawn max 2 when needed
    IdleTimeout: 10 * time.Second,
}
```

## Integration Points

### With Phase 1 (FastCGI Protocol) ✅
The workers listen on sockets ready for FastCGI connections:
- Worker 0: `127.0.0.1:9001.0`
- Worker 1: `127.0.0.1:9001.1`
- Worker N: `127.0.0.1:9001.N`

### With TQServer Routing (Next)
- Load worker.yaml configuration
- Spawn PHP workers on startup
- Route /blog to PHP worker pool
- Forward FastCGI requests from Phase 1
- Health check endpoints

## What's Next

### Phase 2 Completion
- [ ] Connect FastCGI protocol to php-cgi workers
- [ ] Test hello.php execution
- [ ] Verify configuration works end-to-end
- [ ] Load testing with ab/wrk

### Phase 3 Integration
- [ ] Add PHP worker type to TQServer
- [ ] Load configuration from worker.yaml
- [ ] Route requests to PHP workers
- [ ] Integration with existing supervisor

## Files Created

```
pkg/php/
├── binary.go         (110 lines) - PHP-CGI binary detection
├── binary_test.go    (167 lines) - Binary tests
├── config.go         (133 lines) - Configuration structures
├── config_test.go    (137 lines) - Config tests
├── manager.go        (349 lines) - Pool manager
├── worker.go         (288 lines) - Worker wrapper
└── README.md         (380 lines) - Package documentation

examples/php-manager/
└── main.go           (101 lines) - Example application

docs/
├── PHP_FPM_ALTERNATIVE_PLAN.md (updated)
└── PHASE2_PROGRESS.md (new)
```

## Performance Characteristics

- **Startup time**: ~100ms for 4 static workers
- **Memory overhead**: ~5MB per Go manager + php-cgi memory
- **Scaling speed**: Instant (spawns in <50ms per worker)
- **Shutdown time**: <5 seconds (graceful + force-kill timeout)
- **Monitoring overhead**: Minimal (5-second health check interval)

## Comparison to PHP-FPM

| Feature | PHP-FPM | TQServer PHP Manager |
|---------|---------|---------------------|
| Pool Management | ✅ | ✅ |
| Config Files | Required | Optional |
| CLI Overrides | Limited | Full support |
| Health Monitoring | Basic | Advanced |
| Statistics | Limited | Comprehensive |
| Auto Recovery | ✅ | ✅ |
| Dynamic Scaling | ✅ | ✅ Enhanced |
| Language | C | Go |
| Memory Safety | ⚠️ | ✅ |
| Cross-platform | Limited | Full |

## Known Limitations

1. **Requires php-cgi** - Must have php-cgi binary installed
2. **No Unix sockets yet** - TCP sockets only (Phase 3)
3. **No OPcache management** - Manual configuration only
4. **No slow request logging** - Coming in Phase 4

## Conclusion

Phase 2 is **complete and production-ready**. The PHP-CGI process management system is fully functional with:

- ✅ Three pool management strategies
- ✅ Automatic crash recovery
- ✅ Health monitoring and statistics
- ✅ Flexible configuration
- ✅ Comprehensive test coverage
- ✅ Example application
- ✅ Complete documentation

**Ready for Phase 3**: Integration with TQServer routing and FastCGI request forwarding.

**Estimated Time**: 6 hours (implementation + testing + documentation)

**Next Step**: Connect php-cgi workers to FastCGI protocol layer from Phase 1.

Commit message:

docs: update Phase2 integration docs to php-fpm-first

docs/PHASE2_SUMMARY.md, after:

# Phase 2 Implementation Summary

## Overview

Successfully implemented **Phase 2: PHP Integration** for TQServer. The implementation originally supported direct `php-cgi` process management but has been migrated to a php-fpm-first architecture: TQServer generates php-fpm pool configs, launches `php-fpm -F -y <config>`, and communicates with php-fpm via a pooled FastCGI client.

## What Was Built

### Core Components (1,137 lines of code + 304 lines of tests)

1. **Binary Detection & Management** (`pkg/php/binary.go`)
   - Auto-detect php-cgi in PATH
   - Parse PHP version (major.minor.patch)
   - Generate command-line arguments
   - Feature detection (OPcache, JIT, Fibers)

2. **Configuration System** (`pkg/php/config.go`)
   - Flexible PHP settings (php.ini + CLI overrides)
   - Pool configuration (static/dynamic/ondemand)
   - Validation logic
   - Worker limits and timeouts

3. **Worker Process Management** (`pkg/php/worker.go`)
   - Spawn php-cgi processes
   - State tracking (idle/active/terminating/crashed)
   - Stdout/stderr capture
   - Health monitoring
   - Automatic recycling (max requests)
   - Graceful shutdown

4. **Pool Manager** (`pkg/php/manager.go`)
   - Three pool strategies:
     - **Static**: Fixed worker count
     - **Dynamic**: Scale between min/max
     - **Ondemand**: Spawn on-demand
   - Automatic crash recovery
   - Health checks (5-second interval)
   - Statistics collection
   - Load-based scaling

5. **Comprehensive Tests**
   - Configuration validation
   - Binary detection
   - Feature support
   - Pool manager logic
   - All tests passing ✅

6. **Example Application** (`examples/php-manager/`)
   - Demonstrates full PHP worker lifecycle
   - Real-time statistics monitoring
   - Graceful shutdown handling

## Key Features

✅ **php-fpm-first supported** - TQServer generates php-fpm pool configs and can launch `php-fpm` in the foreground. Legacy direct `php-cgi` management is deprecated.
✅ **Flexible Configuration** - php.ini base + individual overrides  
✅ **Three Pool Modes** - Static, dynamic, ondemand  
✅ **Automatic Recovery** - Crashed workers automatically replaced  
✅ **Health Monitoring** - Continuous health checks and statistics  
✅ **Worker Recycling** - Prevent memory leaks via max requests  
✅ **Graceful Shutdown** - Clean termination with timeout  
✅ **Process Isolation** - Each worker is a separate process  
✅ **Output Logging** - Capture stdout/stderr from php-cgi  
✅ **Version Detection** - Parse PHP version and capabilities  

## Architecture

### Process Management
```
TQServer
  └─> Manager
       ├─> Worker 1 (php-cgi process on socket .0)
       ├─> Worker 2 (php-cgi process on socket .1)
       ├─> Worker N (php-cgi process on socket .N)
       └─> Health Monitor (goroutine)
```

### Configuration Flow (php-fpm-first)
```
worker.yaml
  ↓
Config struct
  ↓
Generate php-fpm pool config + php.ini/overrides
  ↓
Launch `php-fpm -F -y <generated-config>` (supervised by TQServer)
  ↓
TQServer uses pooled FastCGI client to communicate with php-fpm
```

### Worker Lifecycle
```
spawnWorker()
  → Start()
    → exec.Command()
      → monitor() [goroutine]
      → handleOutput() [goroutines]
  → MarkActive()
  → ... process requests ...
  → MarkIdle()
  → [health check]
  → Stop()
```

## Code Quality

- **Lines of Code**: 1,137 (production) + 304 (tests)
- **Test Coverage**: Core functionality fully tested
- **Compile Errors**: 0
- **Lint Warnings**: 0
- **Failed Tests**: 0
- **Documentation**: README.md with examples and API reference

## Test Results

```bash
$ go test ./pkg/php/... -v

PASS: TestBinaryBuildArgs
PASS: TestBinarySupportsFeature (6/6 subtests)
PASS: TestDetectInvalidBinary
PASS: TestConfigValidation (7/7 subtests)
PASS: TestPoolConfigGetWorkerCount (3/3 subtests)
PASS: TestWorkerState

SKIP: TestDetectBinary (requires php-cgi)
SKIP: TestBinaryVersion (requires php-cgi)

ok      github.com/mevdschee/tqserver/pkg/php   0.002s
```

## Example Usage

### Static Pool (Production)

```go
config := &php.Config{
    Binary:       "",  // Auto-detect
    DocumentRoot: "/var/www/html",
    ConfigFile:   "/etc/php/8.2/php.ini",
    Settings: map[string]string{
        "memory_limit": "256M",
        "display_errors": "0",
    },
    Pool: php.PoolConfig{
        Manager:        "static",
        MaxWorkers:     8,
        MaxRequests:    5000,
        RequestTimeout: 60 * time.Second,
        ListenAddr:     "127.0.0.1:9000",
    },
}

binary, _ := php.DetectBinary(config.Binary)
manager, _ := php.NewManager(binary, config)
manager.Start()
```

### Dynamic Pool (Auto-scaling)

```go
Pool: php.PoolConfig{
    Manager:      "dynamic",
    MinWorkers:   2,   // Always keep 2 minimum
    MaxWorkers:   20,  // Scale up to 20
    StartWorkers: 5,   // Start with 5
    IdleTimeout:  60 * time.Second,
}
```

### Ondemand Pool (Development)

```go
Pool: php.PoolConfig{
    Manager:     "ondemand",
    MaxWorkers:  2,    // Spawn max 2 when needed
    IdleTimeout: 10 * time.Second,
}
```

## Integration Points

### With Phase 1 (FastCGI Protocol) ✅
The workers listen on sockets ready for FastCGI connections:
- Worker 0: `127.0.0.1:9001.0`
- Worker 1: `127.0.0.1:9001.1`
- Worker N: `127.0.0.1:9001.N`

### With TQServer Routing (Next)
- Load worker.yaml configuration
- Spawn PHP workers on startup
- Route /blog to PHP worker pool
- Forward FastCGI requests from Phase 1
- Health check endpoints

## What's Next

### Phase 2 Completion
- [ ] Connect FastCGI protocol to php-cgi workers
- [ ] Test hello.php execution
- [ ] Verify configuration works end-to-end
- [ ] Load testing with ab/wrk

### Phase 3 Integration
- [ ] Add PHP worker type to TQServer
- [ ] Load configuration from worker.yaml
- [ ] Route requests to PHP workers
- [ ] Integration with existing supervisor

## Files Created

```
pkg/php/
├── binary.go         (110 lines) - PHP-CGI binary detection
├── binary_test.go    (167 lines) - Binary tests
├── config.go         (133 lines) - Configuration structures
├── config_test.go    (137 lines) - Config tests
├── manager.go        (349 lines) - Pool manager
├── worker.go         (288 lines) - Worker wrapper
└── README.md         (380 lines) - Package documentation

examples/php-manager/
└── main.go           (101 lines) - Example application

docs/
├── PHP_FPM_ALTERNATIVE_PLAN.md (updated)
└── PHASE2_PROGRESS.md (new)
```

## Performance Characteristics

- **Startup time**: ~100ms for 4 static workers
- **Memory overhead**: ~5MB per Go manager + php-cgi memory
- **Scaling speed**: Instant (spawns in <50ms per worker)
- **Shutdown time**: <5 seconds (graceful + force-kill timeout)
- **Monitoring overhead**: Minimal (5-second health check interval)

## Comparison to PHP-FPM

| Feature | PHP-FPM | TQServer PHP Manager |
|---------|---------|---------------------|
| Pool Management | ✅ | ✅ |
| Config Files | Required | Optional |
| CLI Overrides | Limited | Full support |
| Health Monitoring | Basic | Advanced |
| Statistics | Limited | Comprehensive |
| Auto Recovery | ✅ | ✅ |
| Dynamic Scaling | ✅ | ✅ Enhanced |
| Language | C | Go |
| Memory Safety | ⚠️ | ✅ |
| Cross-platform | Limited | Full |

## Known Limitations

1. **php-fpm or php-cgi** - TQServer prefers `php-fpm` (launched by the supervisor); legacy `php-cgi` support is available for testing but is no longer the recommended production flow.
2. **Unix socket support** - Some code paths still favor TCP; unix socket support is an outstanding item.
3. **OPcache management** - Manual configuration via php.ini or pool config; integration is planned.
4. **Slow request logging** - Coming in Phase 4

## Conclusion

Phase 2 is **complete and production-ready**. The PHP-CGI process management system is fully functional with:

- ✅ Three pool management strategies
- ✅ Automatic crash recovery
- ✅ Health monitoring and statistics
- ✅ Flexible configuration
- ✅ Comprehensive test coverage
- ✅ Example application
- ✅ Complete documentation

**Ready for Phase 3**: Integration with TQServer routing and FastCGI request forwarding.

**Estimated Time**: 6 hours (implementation + testing + documentation)

**Next Step**: Connect php-cgi workers to FastCGI protocol layer from Phase 1.
